I'm Peter Bierman.
I work on the Installation
and Setup group.
I'm going to be talking to you today
about software installation strategies.
Now,
I'm going to mostly be covering Mac OS X,
10.4, Tiger,
because all of you are hoping
to ship your application soon.
I'm going to be covering
creating PackageMaker,
creating packages with
a new tool we've got,
PackageMaker 3.0.
It's brand new, coming out in Leopard.
We're hoping to have
it also run on Tiger.
I'm going to cover various ways to
deliver your software to your customers,
things the installer can do.
I'm going to go over a
bunch of installer features,
some of the more confusing things that
people have asked us questions about.
And to do this,
I'm going to break down the
topic into four major sections.
I'm going to talk about
creating your software,
creating your packages,
delivering those packages,
installing the packages, and upgrading.
So let's talk first
about creating packages.
First,
the reason you create packages is to walk
the user through the install process.
A lot of users are somewhat
intimidated by installing software,
by modifying their machine,
and an installer package
gives you the opportunity to
present this task in an easy,
hand-holding kind of method,
where the user sees each step,
they expect what's happening,
they know what to do next.
The installer also has a bunch of
features related to some of the
more advanced techniques getting
software onto the user's machine.
For example,
the installer can allow the user to
authenticate as an administrator,
and you can install files as root,
which the user wouldn't
normally be able to do.
The installer also has the ability
to find relocated files if the user
drags their application somewhere
else after they've installed it.
The next version of your
installer can find that,
install it where they chose to put it,
and there's a bunch of other features.
So, to create packages,
the first step is you
need to get organized.
You need to know what you
want to present to the user.
You need to know what software you're
actually going to put on the user's
machine and make sure that it is what
you want to put on the user's machine.
Every file is where it's supposed to be.
Every permission is set the right way.
So, you want to check those things out
before you create your packages.
And finally,
you want to take note of any special
requirements your software has,
things that you're going to check for the
user before they install and inform them,
hey, you actually need an iSight
camera to install this or it's
not going to be very useful,
things like that.
So the first step is to use PackageMaker.
Now, in Leopard, I mentioned earlier,
we're introducing new PackageMaker 3.0.
It's great.
It's vastly improved over the
previous versions of PackageMaker.
Earlier versions of PackageMaker were
more like a property list editor.
They exposed all the features
of the installer in terms
of checkboxes and pop-ups,
but it didn't really put it
together in terms of what you
were trying to accomplish.
The new version of PackageMaker
is much more workflow oriented.
It lets you start with your software,
give it to PackageMaker,
and PackageMaker gives you packages.
So to see that, we're going to start out
with a demonstration.
I'd like to introduce Sean Kelly.
He's the engineer that's been
working on PackageMaker so
hard for the last year or so.
And Sean, let's see it.
Thank you, Peter.
Could we switch to the demo machine?
Good morning, everybody.
My name is Sean Kelly.
I work on PackageMaker at Apple.
In today's demo,
we'll create an installer
for three items,
two applications, and a widget,
along with some interface resources.
So let's get started.
As Peter suggested,
I've gathered the items
for my installation,
the two applications, and the widget,
along with my interface resources.
So,
we'll launch the new PackageMaker 3.0,
a new document will be created,
and the Install Properties
dialog will appear.
This dialog drives much of
PackageMaker's behavior.
The Organization field is used to
pre-populate your package identifiers,
while the Target determines
what PackageMaker will build.
If you target Leopard,
you'll get the new Flat packages,
while if you target Tiger or Panther,
you'll get the old Bundle
packages or Meta packages.
So today,
we'll build the WWDC Demo Installer.
It's from Apple, and we'll target Tiger.
This item up in the upper left corner,
which says WWDC Demo,
represents your installation as a whole.
So metadata,
such as your title and your description,
if you need to set requirements,
you can do that here as well.
To add items into PackageMaker,
you can just drag them
into the Contents area.
We'll see that PackageMaker has figured
out that Sketch is an application,
and it's filled in some
default information for you,
such as an install location.
It's pulled the version
number out of the bundle.
It's given you a package identifier,
a recommended authorization level.
It's made it relocatable.
If we go into the Contents tab,
PackageMaker will pull up
the contents of your package,
and you'll be able to edit
the ownership and permissions.
It's very important that these be
correct and be how you want them to be
on your user system when you install.
Fortunately,
PackageMaker makes this easy for you.
If you use the
Apply Recommendations button,
PackageMaker will scan the contents of
your package and your install location,
and apply the ownership and permissions
that meet our best practices guidelines.
Now,
before we add the other content items,
I want to show you one of
the features of PackageMaker.
Instead of you having to
decide if you want a package,
a meta package, or a distribution,
PackageMaker will figure that out
for you based on your configuration.
In Leopard,
we've introduced a new feature
called Install Domains,
which allow you to install in the
user's directory or on the system.
Now, this only works in distributions.
So if you turn any of these domains on,
you'll see that PackageMaker has changed
your installation into a distribution.
So now we'll add our other content items,
and again, we can just drag them in.
And we'll see that PackageMaker
has figured out some default
information for the widget as well.
Now, of course, you can change any of
this to however you want.
If you make any settings that
PackageMaker thinks will cause problems,
it will give you a
warning during the build.
So now we'll set our interface resources.
We'll go into the properties
of the install as a whole,
and we'll use the Edit Interface button,
which will bring up the Interface Editor,
which is what you see is
what you get interface.
What you configure here is
exactly what the user will
see during their installation.
So to add your resources,
you choose which one you want
from the list on the left,
and then you drag your
files into PackageMaker.
So today we have a welcome
or an introduction.
We have a read me.
and we have a license.
So if we build our package,
we'll save it onto the desktop.
And we'll open it in the installer.
And we see we have our
interface resources,
our welcome, our readme, our license,
which the user has to agree to.
And if we continue
through the installation,
our applications will be
installed into /applications and
the widget into library widgets.
So before I turn it back to Peter,
I want to show you one more feature
that we've introduced in PackageMaker.
We've added an extensive
verification process into the build.
So to show you that,
I'll open a document that I've
created for the installation
that we just walked through,
except that I've seeded
it with some errors.
So if we build this...
We'll see that PackageMaker comes
up with some errors and warnings.
If we expand one of these,
we'll see what the errors are,
and we'll also see these
magnification buttons.
If we click one of those,
PackageMaker will change
back to the main interface,
and it'll spotlight the exact
item in the interface where
you need to make your changes.
You can then bring up the Build Results
window from the Project menu,
and you get the same interface.
And you can click through
all of your errors,
and then just click through in the
interface and make your changes.
So that's a brief introduction
to PackageMaker 3.0,
and I'm going to turn it back to Peter.
Thanks, Sean.
That's a vast improvement over
earlier versions of PackageMaker,
and I think you can see that our
investment in PackageMaker over the
last few years is really paying off.
We're committed to continuing to
improve PackageMaker to support
features as we add them to the
installer and make it easier for you
to make packages using our tools.
So that's creating packages.
Let's talk now about delivering packages.
Now, packages in Mac OS X are bundles.
That means they're directories with
other directories and files inside them.
And that means that generally when
you distribute them to your customers
over the Internet or via email,
you have to wrap them in
another container like a
zip file or a disk image.
Also, in Leopard, in 10.5,
we're going to be introducing a solution
to this that doesn't involve containers,
flat packages,
and I'll talk a little bit about that.
First, zip files.
Now,
zip files are really easy to understand.
You just go to the Finder,
click on an object in the Finder,
select it, Control-click or right-click
if you have a two-button mouse,
and you see the Create Archive command
there in the Finder's contextual menu.
The Finder will create you a zip
archive of whatever you have selected.
Now, the zip archive,
when the user double-clicks it,
it'll just expand back into
whatever it was before.
So, there's no opportunity for you
to add additional user interface
explaining to the user what
they're supposed to do next.
There's no way for you to
add a license agreement,
any other sorts of instructions.
It's just what you see is what you get.
One file, multi-files in, one file out.
Next step up from that
is to use a Disk Image.
Now, Disk Images are the recommended
way of delivering your software's
simple applications to customers,
as we currently document them.
Disk Images support a lot
of file system features,
because they are, in a simple sense,
a file system.
They handle resource forks, for example,
but not special authorization.
They won't ask the user to
authenticate as an admin so that
they can install things as root.
But Disk Images do support a
few installer-related features,
like the ability to display a license
agreement or have a background image,
which you can use to
kind of inform the user,
"Hey, you should probably do this."
A good example of that,
here we see a screenshot
of the Firefox Disk Image,
and on the left side of that
you see the Firefox application.
And in the background,
there's a background picture
that's meant to imply to the user
that they're supposed to drag
Firefox into their applications folder.
Now, all of you probably understand that.
I would wonder how many of
our users understand that.
So this may confuse novice users,
but it is a pretty good user experience
in terms of the user can control what's
installed and where it's installed.
To find out more about Disk Images,
you can look at the Disk Images man page,
which is HDI util.
Now, there are improved Disk Images.
These are called
Internet-enabled Disk Images.
And these will automatically,
when downloaded by Safari,
mount themselves, extract their content,
unmount themselves,
and move the Disk Image file
to the trash.
If the contents are an
individual installer package,
that will be opened in the installer,
and the user will go straight from
clicking on a link in their web
page to being in the installer.
That's an improvement.
And it's such an improvement that we'd
like to support that directly in Leopard
without having to use Disk Images at all.
But until then, to see how to do this,
you can look again at
the HDI util man page,
and the command itself is
HDI util Internet-enabled,
and then your Disk Image.
So those two things sort of reveal
one of the flaws in the installer,
one of the areas where it doesn't
quite allow the seamless integration
between the web and installing software.
And so to rectify that, in Leopard,
in 10.5, we're introducing flat packages.
Now, flat packages are just
like our regular packages.
They have the same file name extension,
.pkg, .mpkg,
but they are an individual file.
They're not a directory.
The file format is ZAR.
This is an open source project
that's been worked on by a bunch of
former and current Apple employees,
and it's not limited to the Macintosh.
The goal, actually,
of the ZAR project is to support
creating archives that support
all of the extended file system
attributes of all of the various
operating systems that are out there.
In particular,
it makes a good mesh for what we
want to do with the installer,
so we use the file directly.
The single flat file can
contain one or many packages,
and this enables a
feature that we'll talk,
we'll cover in even more detail,
in our other session on
Thursday afternoon called
Quick Start Installs.
So that's delivering
packages to your customers.
Let's talk about what happens
when the user gets your package
and now goes to install it.
So what can the installer do?
Well, some of the most significant
features of the installer are these.
The installer can find
relocatable software.
The installer can enforce requirements.
The installer can allow customization.
The user can pick some
parts of your software,
but not others.
And the installer also supports custom
plugins that you can create and give
the installer a unique user experience.
So, relocatable software,
what do I mean by that?
Well, on a Macintosh,
applications don't have any particular
need to run from any particular location.
Most users are used to seeing
all of their applications
in the Applications folder,
but there's also the
Applications Utilities folder,
and you might have noticed that a lot of
Apple's applications actually run out of
a Core Services folder somewhere else.
So, that's how we ship the OS.
Users are free to configure their
Applications folder however they'd like.
Maybe they want an
Internet Utilities folder,
maybe they have a
Graphic Utilities folder,
maybe they just have a
big mess on their desktop.
Whatever they have,
this is the Macintosh ease of use.
The user is in charge of their machine,
they can do what they
want with their machine.
And so, it's important for you
to support this ability.
Now, to do that, in the past,
it's been very difficult.
It's involved writing what's
called a Token Definitions PList.
Now, it's just PackageMaker.
It's just a checkbox.
You don't have to do
hardly anything else.
So the next feature of the
installer that people frequently
encounter are requirements.
Requirements are merely the way
for the installer to tell the user,
hey, you're not actually
ready for this software.
You need more hard drive space.
I mean, there's enough hard drive
space to install the software,
but then it's going to go and
create 5 gigabytes of images,
and so you probably want
to have space beforehand.
So you can check for supported hardware.
Does your application need
an iSight video camera?
You can check for which volume the
user's going to install your software on.
Maybe the user is going to install
your app on their other operating
system that's on a different volume.
Here you see a bunch of volumes,
and none of them are allowed.
They all have a little stop sign.
Now there's also the
Custom Install Panel in the installer,
and this is an opportunity
for you to provide optional
content for the user to install.
You may have noticed Leopard and
Tiger and all of the OS releases
before it have a fairly
extensive Custom Install Panel,
where, for example,
you may choose not to install
every font that we provide or all
three gigabytes of printer drivers.
Using the Custom Install Panel,
you can give the user these choices,
and they can choose not to install them,
or you can also set up
what the defaults are,
and you can dynamically control those
defaults based on the hardware that
the user is actually installing on
or other software that's installed.
So you have control over the enabled,
selected, and visible state of every item
in that Custom Install Panel.
Finally,
another major feature that the installer,
we've been asked about a lot,
are installer plugins.
Now, installer plugins are the ability
for you to insert your own panel into
the flow of panes in the installer.
You can, for example,
ask for a serial number or
registration information.
But the key to remember when dealing with
plugins is that the user can bypass them.
The user doesn't have to use a
package to install your software.
They can take the package apart
themselves and get the software that way.
They could have gotten it
from a server somewhere.
Or maybe there's a system administrator
that's trying to install your software
on a thousand machines at once,
and they really don't want to have
to go through the installer and type
in a serial number into each panel.
So it's important that you don't depend
on your installer plugin as a critical
part of installing your software.
It's merely an opportunity for
the user to perform some task when
they're in the mindset of installing.
So how do you use these features?
I'm going to go into a
little bit of detail here.
First, we're going to talk about
enforcing requirements.
So requirements themselves are
generally written as little
snippets of JavaScript that live
inside the distribution script,
which is an XML file inside your package.
Now, this is all 10.4 Tiger technology.
Last year, we were talking about it,
I think,
for the first or maybe the second time,
and it was brand new,
and we were encouraging people to use it.
Now it's here.
Most of our customers have Tiger.
This is something you can depend on.
The advantage of writing your
requirement checks in JavaScript is
that you're not running an arbitrary
executable as soon as the user
double-clicks on your package.
If you don't use the JavaScript ability
to write requirements,
the user's going to see a
little warning sheet that says,
Hey, this package might be dangerous,
and you don't want that.
So these requirements,
they have access to system configuration
information through our JavaScript APIs,
and they can block or warn for the
whole install or specific volumes.
These two requirement checks are
generally called the installation
check and the volume check.
The installation check, like I said,
warns for the entire install.
The volume check checks for volumes.
PackageMaker gets you started
writing requirement checks.
PackageMaker 3.0 has a fairly
simple requirements editor.
It lets you select from a fairly
extensive list of example requirements.
Does this machine have
a certain amount of RAM?
Does this machine have a certain
amount of hard drive space?
node in the I/O registry?
But generally,
when you write a requirement,
you're going to reuse it
elsewhere in your package.
You're going to have both a volume check,
and you might have something
in the custom install panel.
And so for these more
complicated interactions,
you're going to go directly
to the distribution script,
which is inside the package.
So to demonstrate that,
both the requirement editing ability
in PackageMaker and how to get
directly to the distribution script,
I'm going to go back to Sean.
Sean?
Thank you, Peter.
Could we switch to the demo machine,
please?
So in this demo,
we'll add some simple requirements to
a Sketch package using PackageMaker,
and then we'll dig inside the
package and show you how to
modify those requirements by hand.
So I have a PackageMaker document
that I've created for Sketch.
We'll launch that,
and we'll go into the Requirements tab,
and we'll add one requirement.
We'll see from this list that
PackageMaker provides a number
of built-in requirements.
In this demo, we'll check that 64-bit
instructions are available.
We'll see are 64-bit instructions
available is equal to true,
and then we can provide a message
that will be shown to the user
should this requirement fail.
So we'll say 64-bit
instructions required.
This software needs 64-bit instructions.
We'll save our requirement.
You can add as many
requirements as you want.
PackageMaker will add
all of them together.
It will also determine if they should
be volume checks or installation checks.
In addition, you can specify whether a
requirement is required,
meaning that if the
requirement does not pass,
the installation will not
be allowed to proceed,
or optional,
meaning that the user will only
be warned about the requirement.
In this case, we'll make it required.
So we'll build our package onto the
desktop and run it in the installer.
And we'll see that this machine
does not have 64-bit instructions,
so the installation is
not allowed to proceed.
Now, as Peter mentioned,
there might be situations where you
need to modify the requirements by hand.
In order to do that,
you should navigate to
the package in the Finder.
You can Control-click and
do Show Package Contents,
and inside of the contents directory
is the distribution.dist file,
which is an XML and JavaScript file.
We'll open that in a text editor.
Now the important pieces in here for this
demo are the installation check element,
which has a script attribute
that specifies which
JavaScript function to call.
If this function returns true,
then the installation check will pass.
If it returns false,
then the installation check will fail.
So PackageMaker has created a
function called PMInstallCheck,
which uses sysctl to check
for 64-bit operations.
If it returns false,
then the installation check will fail.
If the installation check returns false,
And with that,
I'll turn it back to Peter to
provide some more details.
Thanks, Sean.
So those are package requirements.
As you can see, PackageMaker, again,
makes this much easier
than it used to be.
However, requirements are code.
And generally,
when an application writes code for you,
you're probably going to want to
understand what that code is doing,
and you're going to want to look at it,
edit it yourself, tweak it.
So I'm going to talk about
this in a little more detail.
As Sean showed you,
there's the InstallationCheck element.
This is similar to the
VolumeCheck element,
or how requirements are used elsewhere.
It has a script attribute,
which essentially is the contents of
that attribute are a JavaScript function,
or a function call.
Any snippet of JavaScript,
they can be true, false, one, zero.
In this case,
we're having it call the function
that's defined in the script element.
In the script element,
there can be one or more script
elements in your distribution.
script,
and they contain all your JavaScript.
So in this case, we're using the built-in
JavaScript objects that
the installer provides.
Now, you may be familiar with
JavaScript in other contexts,
like web pages, obviously.
And in the context of a web page,
JavaScript has access to
information about the web page
that's provided by the web browser.
In the installer, it's very similar,
except for we're not providing you
any information about web pages.
We're providing you information about
the system and the installer's runtime.
So you can see we provided some
things like a log command that lets
you write to the installer log.
We also provide access to the I/O Kit,
I/O Registry, sysctl, Gestalt,
several other system functions
that let you find out
information about the machine.
Now, you may be wondering, OK,
now my JavaScript can run,
and it can find out all this
information about the machine.
Isn't that some sort of security risk?
Well, in fact, it's not,
because your JavaScript can learn as
much as it would like about the machine,
but it can't do anything
with that information other
than tell the installer,
essentially, yes or no, you can install.
We don't allow your
JavaScript to write to files.
We don't allow your JavaScript to
write to the network.
It's not a question of value.
It's not a question of
blocking these things.
There's just no way to do it.
There's no API within
the JavaScript sandbox.
So it's pretty safe.
So here we see, again,
another example of the installation
check that Sean showed earlier.
Mine's a little different.
Mine's going to check the amount of
RAM that's available on the machine.
Again,
it's going to use sysctl to find out the
physical amount of memory in the machine.
It's going to compare
that to 4 gigabytes.
And it's going to set some values
in this global variable that,
again, is one of the variables
that the installer runtime
provides to your JavaScript.
And in this case, it's myResult.
And myResult has some attributes-- type,
title, and message.
The type, in this case,
is going to tell the installer that
this particular installation check
is not going to stop the install.
It's just going to warn the user.
And the title is going to be warning.
This is going to be
the sheet that appears.
And the message is going to be,
this package requires 4 gigabytes of RAM.
That would be a pretty
weird thing to check for,
but it makes a good example.
In this case, my installation check is
going to return false.
And that's going to cause any
other things that have been chained
together with this particular snippet
of JavaScript to not be executed.
So the first one that fails is
essentially setting the global variable
for what should appear in the UI,
and then saying, OK, stop.
Don't do any more checks.
And what that looks like is this.
You see a dialog.
The installer says, "Warning,
package requires 4 gigabytes
of RAM." And in this case,
they can hit OK and continue.
So those are requirements.
And related requirements are
the Custom Install Panel.
Now, you may be asking yourself,
how are requirements related
to the Custom Install Panel?
Well,
in earlier versions of the installer,
you created your user interface
in the Custom Install Panel by how
your packages related to each other.
The titles of your packages were
the things that would appear
in the Custom Install Panel,
and they may or may not be selected,
depending on flags in the packages.
And this became very difficult,
because each package actually
contained information about
some of the other packages.
And so they weren't independent.
They started being tied
together in weird ways.
So what we did in Tiger is we completely
redid how the Custom Install Panel works
when you're using a distribution script.
And when you're using
a distribution script,
you get complete control over
what appears in this panel.
You get to select what choices
are that are given to the user.
These are the individual line
items in the Custom Install Panel.
And you get to select how particular
packages map to those choices.
You can have choices
represent zero packages,
or you can have choices
represent hundreds of packages.
It's up to you.
And those choices,
you get control over the selected,
enabled, and visible states using, again,
JavaScript, which ties us back to
the requirement checks.
So choices can interact with each other.
Much like JavaScript requirement
checks can find out
information about the computer,
about what software is installed,
your choices have snippets of
JavaScript that can find out the
current state of other choices,
can find out the current state of
installed software via receipts,
et cetera.
So you can set up UI that says, well,
if the user picks this choice,
say my application,
then they're also allowed
to install my font.
But they're not allowed to
install the font unless they
also install the application.
So here we see an example.
What I've got is a screenshot here of a
sort of manufactured custom install panel
where I've got four different choices.
And what I've done is I've set the
selected and enabled states for
these choices to map to sort of
four choices as the user sees them.
And so you see selected, optional,
required, and prohibited.
And these are kind of the four
major states that you might
consider your software to be in
when the user is in this panel.
There are other states,
but you don't want to get into them.
So selected and optional is something
the user is allowed to pick from.
Has the user picked it?
It's selected.
Have they not?
Well, it's optional.
They're not going to install it.
Required and prohibited,
equally self-explanatory.
Now, this particular example,
I've got a choice up on the screen,
the source code in the
XML that sets its attributes.
Its ID is just D.
Its title is prohibited.
Its selected attribute is false.
And its enabled state is connected
to a JavaScript function,
again, just like requirement checks.
This JavaScript function is going
to check to see if today is Friday.
Today is not Friday,
so the item is prohibited.
Now,
these attributes are re-evaluated often.
They're re-evaluated every time
the user clicks on something
in the Custom Install panel.
Some of them are provided
to be evaluated less often.
For example,
we give you three attributes that you
can set that set the initial state,
and they're only evaluated the very first
time the user enters the panel or when
the user switches back to Easy Install.
Now, one of the things,
one of the responsibilities
of this is that you have to
preserve the user's intent.
Because you can set the selected state,
You can change the selected state
even though the user thinks that
they've changed the selected state.
If you have an enabled control,
and then the user selects it,
and then you unselect it,
they're going to be like, what the heck?
I just clicked on that.
Why is it unclicking?
So to explain this in
a little more detail,
I'm going to bring up the demo machine.
Let's go ahead and show
you one of these choices.
So what I've got here are
two distribution scripts
just in their bare form.
You can actually launch
the installer this way.
And I'm going to bring one
of them up in TextEdit,
my text editor of choice,
and make it a little bigger.
And so what I've got here is just
enough of a distribution script
to make the installer happy.
And you see I've got the-- this
is the custom install panel.
It's going to have four choices in it.
My first choice is going
to be an application.
My second choice is going to be a font.
And my other two choices are just
there so I have something to click on.
So if I launch the installer and
navigate to the Custom Install panel,
what we see here is my app and my font.
So the font, the enabled state is false,
and that's as we expect, it's false.
And the selected state is set to be equal
to the application's selected state.
So this choices variable is
a global variable provided by
the installer in JavaScript.
And you can see the state of any of
the attributes of the app choice.
So if I unclick the app,
the font unclicks.
And they'll follow each
other very clearly.
Selecting other things doesn't
have any effect on that.
Now let's say I want to make it so that
the user can optionally install the font.
They don't want necessarily--
I want the font to become selected
if the user clicks on the app,
but then the user can
unselect it if they want.
So to do that--
I want to tie the enabled state to
the application's enabled state.
So this is very similar.
I'll make it nice and big again.
Close that installer and bring
up this distribution script.
And so here we have the enabled state
of the font is going to be equal
to the selected state of the app.
And the selected state of the
font is going to be equal to
something a little more complicated.
I'll try to make that a little bigger.
So when I click on the app,
the font becomes
unselected and unenabled.
And if I click on the app again,
the font is now available.
I can click on it.
I can only click on it
if the app is selected.
What I've got here is
this My Choice Selected.
And if I take this out,
you'll see why it's necessary.
Now what happens with this is that the
app and the font are still connected.
It appears to work correctly.
It appears to be what I want.
But if I select the app, and now, okay,
well, I don't want the font.
Oh, but I do want this other thing.
Oh, wait, now I got the font again.
Oh, I don't want the font,
but I do want this other thing.
Hey, I said I didn't want the font.
So what's going on here is that
every time I click on something,
the selected state of the font is
becoming the selected state of the app.
Now, it's not happening when
I click on the font,
because that could lead to loops.
So we don't evaluate the font's choice
attributes when you click on it.
The important thing to take away
from this is that if you want
to enforce a particular setting,
it's important that you also
make the enabled state false,
or make sure that you take into
account the user selection.
Which is available by looking
directly at the choice itself.
Okay,
so I'm going to go back to the slides.
So that's the Custom Install Panel.
The Custom Install Panel can be as easy
or as complicated as you'd like it to be,
as you see.
For example,
if you look at Leopard's Install CD,
you can look at the distribution
script for the install CD itself,
or I guess it's a DVD now.
And in that is a very
complicated custom install panel.
There are, for example,
15 different localizations.
I guess the Leopard
seed is only in English,
but Tiger is a good example of this.
And we make it so that you have
to install localizations that
you've installed previously,
because we don't want you to upgrade
from 10.4 to 10.5 and find out that
now if you try to run in Japanese,
nothing works because you
only have 10.4 Japanese,
but you have 10.5 everything else.
This is the kind of detail that we want
you to put into your custom install
panel if you really go whole hog with it.
Now, you can get a lot more information
about how the installer is
evaluating these choice attributes.
There's a secret installer
flag here you see.
If you use the defaults command,
you can turn on the debug engine,
and all of that information will
appear in the installer log,
and it will tell you, hey,
I'm evaluating this one,
and it changed that,
and so I had to reevaluate this,
and it can be pretty confusing,
but it can also be pretty illuminating.
So, that's the Custom Install Panel and
requirements.
Done in JavaScript, XML,
it's pretty easy once
you get to understand it.
Next feature, Installer Plugins.
I mentioned earlier installer plugins
are the ability to insert your own user
interface into the installer's flow.
These sequence of panels that the
installer usually presents are Welcome,
Read Me, License, Target Select,
and then Custom Install.
If you'd like to insert a panel,
for example,
registration or enter a serial number,
you can do that using
an installer plugin.
Now, installer plugins consist
of sections and panes.
Sections are the things that you see
on the left side of the installer.
They are the bullet items
as the installer proceeds.
Panes are the actual content that
you see on each of these panels.
And so a particular section is
allowed to have more than one pane.
You can have a registration section,
for example, that shows up as a single
bullet item on the left,
registration,
and that has three or four pages of,
you know, tell me about your mother,
tell me about your family,
tell me about your dog.
Your users will love that.
So here you see an installer section.
I've highlighted the little bullets
I was talking about on the left.
This is an example we provide of entering
a name accompanying serial number.
So we had another example
that we did last year where we
actually inserted a web view,
and so you could create a
late-breaking news panel,
for example,
that would download the README for this
particular version and tell the user,
hey, this one's got a bug.
Go get that other one.
These have, again,
a section on the left that
shows different panes.
You can have more than one
section in your plugin.
You can have as many
sections as you'd like.
So to create an installer plugin,
there's an Xcode template.
This is as simple as launching Xcode,
creating a new project,
and picking from that big window of
example templates that Apple provides,
there's an installer plugin template.
And this links you against the
installer plugins framework,
which includes classes that implement the
installer section and the installer pane.
The cool thing about this is that
these classes that are already
there for you do 98% of the work.
All you have to do is subclass them
and override a couple of methods
to control what you want to do.
Particularly, you can control whether
your section appears at all.
You can have a shouldLoadSection,
I believe,
is the method that maybe you don't need
to do registration in some circumstances,
or maybe your plugin doesn't appear
if certain hardware is missing.
So to show this in more detail,
I'm going to go back to the demo machine.
Shortly,
on the worldwide Developer Connect site,
we're going to have this sample.
And this was written by one of our
engineers just a few months ago.
And hopefully,
it illustrates a lot more of the
standard features that you make use of
when dealing with installer plugins.
So I'm going to launch Xcode real quick.
Now,
let me show you before I get into this.
If you create a new project,
you see this window here.
And all the way down the bottom,
standard Apple plugins.
Thank you, Expose.
Standard Apple plugins, where'd it go?
There it is.
Installer plugins right there.
So this would be how you would
create one from scratch using Xcode.
I'm going to start with a project
that's already here because it's got
a little more things set up for me.
So first I'm just going to
show you what this looks like.
I've already built it.
I'm going to launch the installer.
And first thing we see is a
kind of scary-looking message
that most users won't read.
They'll just hit Continue.
And this message says that as
soon as I run this package,
some code is going to run.
And it's not Apple's code.
It's not the installer.
It's your code.
And so this is somewhat dangerous,
and we hope to have some
solutions for this in the future.
But until then, the user clicks Continue,
and they are now seeing
a regular installer.
And it has a section here, Registration.
And if I continue,
we see a registration information.
So I say, I'm Peter Bierman,
and I work for Apple,
and my serial number is 123456789.
And look at that.
Oh, it's not valid.
Maybe I need DAS.
Maybe I need DASH, like it tells me I do.
Oh, it's all better.
Okay.
So that's what we're
trying to build here.
Not sure why that's happening?
So here's our sample plug-in project.
Now the key pieces here are-- this is,
I think, the bulk of our source code.
This is the registration pane.
And there's a big license here.
And it has a header.
The header's very small,
and the important thing here is that
our registration pane object is a
subclass of the installer pane object.
And then we've added a few
IB outlets for our own nib.
So our registration pane subclass
here has a bunch of methods that
basically take care of housekeeping
for what this panel wants to do.
For example,
when I tried to exit the pane and
my serial number wasn't valid,
it checked to see if my
serial number was valid.
And if that was no,
it updated the button state.
And the button state
here was setNextEnabled.
So this is a method
provided by the installer.
You could set whether or not
the user is allowed to continue.
You can see it was checking to see if
it was trying to continue or go back,
so it only checked if
I was trying to go forward,
and then it put up an alert sheet.
Otherwise, it said, "Yeah,
you can exit the pane,
and the installer takes
care of the rest." So,
this plugin that you just saw,
very simple plugin, is something like,
what, I don't know, 40 lines of code?
I think you can handle that.
We'll take a quick look at the nib.
NIB, also very simple.
All it is is the content
area of the installer.
You don't have to provide any
of the standard user interface
that the installer ships with.
The files owner is set to
be an installer section,
and in that, there's an outlet first pane
that tells--you can have multiple
NIBs and tells your section which
pane is going to load first,
and from there,
the installer's off and running.
Finally,
when you actually create your plugin,
your plugin is going to end
up in a plugins folder inside
your package contents folder.
And there's an installer section's
plist that lets you control where
your plugin appears relative to
the other panels of the installer,
and of course,
the plugin itself that Xcode built.
And those are installer plugins.
Go back to the slides.
So, installer plugins,
sort of a powerful ability for you to
customize the installer's user interface.
They allow users to perform all
of their setup in one place.
Users are sitting down and saying, hey,
I'm installing software,
I've got this task I'm
trying to accomplish,
I want to, you know,
open the box and put the CD in
and install the software,
and okay,
I'll get my registration done and
I'll type in my serial number.
These are all things that
the user wants to do once.
So if the user is doing it once,
doing it in the installer,
it makes sense.
On the other hand,
there are people out there
that are doing automated setup.
The process that your user is
performing once in their living room,
where they want to get everything
done and then be done with it,
is a little different than the
process that a system is performing,
say, in Maine,
where they're installing on
something like 15,000 iBooks.
They don't want to sit at
the installer 15,000 times.
So, keep automated setup in mind.
Your plugin should essentially work by
collecting information from the user
and setting that aside in a cookie
for your application to find later.
If your application
doesn't find that cookie,
your application should probably
provide the same user experience,
the opportunity to license or
register itself at that point.
Installer plugins are a convenience.
They are not meant to be
a gatekeeper of any sort.
So those are the features that the
user deals with in the installer when
they are installing your software.
What do you have to worry about
when you're thinking about upgrades?
Now, all of you are working
to ship great software,
I hope.
And all of you are hoping that
your software is so great,
you're going to have a version 2,
a version 3, a version 4.
You're going to take over the world.
You should be thinking about
that now when you're creating
your installer packages,
because the installer uses
upgrades to add new files,
to replace existing files,
to remove obsolete files-- that's a
key-- and to provide a receipt trail
so that the user who has installed your
software and all the other software
on their machine knows what they've
done and can look at it later and say,
hey, did something go wrong here,
or did I do that?
Now, the best way to deal with preparing
for upgrades is to start by
using a multi-package install.
And a multi-package install
allows you to divide your content
up into independent parts.
You can have, say, an application,
and a framework, and a font,
and these each live in separate packages.
And they each have separate versions,
and they each have separate package IDs,
so the installer knows of each of
these things as separate things.
And when you upgrade each of them,
you can say, well,
I only really need to change the font.
And the installer will only compare
the new font to the old font,
and will only remove the
files that are appropriate.
This is also the basis for how you
set up the custom install panel.
Now, it used to be that you had to
create multiple packages to
use the custom install panel,
and the packages themselves contained
this presentation information.
Now, the packages no longer contain
the presentation information,
but the custom install panel
still eventually evaluates
down to particular choices,
and particular choices evaluate
down to particular packages.
You can't have choices say, hey,
install just part of this package.
So, when dealing with upgrades,
another thing you have to worry
about are the installer scripts.
Now, installer scripts,
another feature of the installer,
you can create scripts that run
before or after files are installed,
and the scripts can be configured to run
either for plain installs or upgrades.
So, there's a lot of power here.
You could, in fact,
install all of your software from
the installer script if you wanted,
and I know a lot of you have perhaps
written packages that delete files
or add files from installer scripts,
and we want to warn you not to do
that because installer scripts,
in general, are going to make
uninstall more difficult,
and this is an important
feature we've heard a lot about,
and we really would like to pursue it.
So do use installer scripts to
do things like start services.
If I install a new program
and it needs a daemon to run,
then great, when my install is finished,
a post-install script,
spawning that daemon and getting it
going so that everything's just working,
I don't need to reboot, that's ideal.
Use an installer script to
import modified preference files.
If you've got a complicated
project and version 2 of this
project doesn't actually know how
to read version 1's preferences,
which is unusual, but it does happen,
you can use an installer script
to import the version 1 preference
file and chew it up and turn it
into a version 2 preference file,
so the user doesn't lose anything.
But don't use installer scripts
to create or delete files.
When you do that,
the installer is unaware of
what your script has done.
And so the installer doesn't
know that that file was removed.
The installer doesn't know
if that file was there.
The installer's never heard of that file.
And so if the installer were to provide
system verification or an audit trail,
that's all under the radar of
the installer at that point.
And most importantly,
don't use your installer scripts
to modify the installer's receipts.
That's sort of like deleting files,
but even worse.
Now the installer has
lost part of its brain.
You've given it a lobotomy.
This may be useful for you to
figure out how to make your
packages upgrade correctly.
But trust me, that's not what you want
to do in the long run.
You're just sort of adding to chaos.
So another feature of the installer,
particularly relevant to upgrades,
and this is new in Leopard,
are patch packages.
Now this is something that we've had
available in Software Update for a while.
You've probably seen that
when you download 10.4.7
and you already have 10.4.6,
the download size is a lot
smaller than if you have 10.4.5.
And that's because what Apple does
is offer a patch package for the
most recent Software Update to
the one we're just shipping,
and a delta,
or rather a combo package that includes
everything if you're installing
on anything earlier than that.
Now patch packages require
particular software to already exist.
By definition, all they do is add things
to what's already there.
So they're just the delta
between what was there before
and what you want there now.
Because of this,
they specify strict requirements.
They have a checksum for the files
that they're going to install over,
and they have other requirements to
make sure they can only be installed
if all of the prerequisites are met.
Now the cool thing about patch packages,
and I mentioned this
a little bit earlier,
this is a Leopard feature,
that combined with distribution
scripts and flat packages,
patch packages give us a feature that
we call Quick Start Network Installs,
where I showed you earlier,
I was giving the example
of the requirement checks,
and I ran a distribution
script in the installer,
and you saw that distribution script
was only like a page in TextEdit.
It was maybe 10K.
You can take a distribution
script and send it to the user
over the internet as a bare file,
and that provides you
with a patch package.
It provides the entire user experience,
and this can download
packages using flat packages,
and can download patch packages.
And so now the user can get version
two of your software using nothing
more than a 50K web download,
and then the minimum amount of download
to get the rest of your software.
We're going to cover this in a lot
more detail on Thursday at 2:00 PM in,
I think, Mission?
No, Presidio.
And so that's going to be
a really exciting session.
I hope to see you all there.
Upgrades.
Wrapping this up.
Upgrades the best practices.
Create fine-grain packages.
This helps the installer.
The installer is more efficient with
more packages than it used to be.
It helps receipts.
Use proper versions in your packages.
The package version is not the
same as your application version.
Now, this is an area where even the new
PackageMaker can't really help.
It provides a suggestion,
and it actually grabs the
version of your software out
of your application and says,
hey, the version of your package
should probably be the same.
I'd advise you that
that's a little bit risky,
because there will be times that you
ship a new version of your package.
Maybe there's a bug in your package.
Maybe you got a requirement check wrong,
and you want to roll out a
new version of your package.
Is that a new version
of your application?
That's probably not.
So keep these things separate,
or at the very least,
keep very close watch over what they are.
The installer itself doesn't
care about package versions,
even when upgrading.
It doesn't care if one version
is bigger or smaller or letters
or numbers or any of that.
But there are other
parts of the installer,
for example,
your scripts or the custom install panel,
where some of the logic you write to say,
is this an upgrade or not,
does care whether one number
is greater than another.
So I strongly advise you to use regular
just numbers and decimal points.
Keep consistent package IDs.
Don't change your package
ID with each release.
For example, don't put your version
number in your package ID.
The package ID is how the installer
knows how to do an upgrade.
It looks and says, hey,
this package is package ID foo.
Did I ever install package ID foo before?
And if it did,
it finds that in the receipts,
and it does a comparison.
It says, these are the files
that used to be in foo.
These are the files
that are in foo today.
And it uses that information
to decide which files to
delete and which files to add.
If you delete receipts,
or if you change package IDs,
you subvert this mechanism,
and the installer slowly gets
confused and thinks that either
more is installed than really is,
or less is installed than really is.
And we want to make it possible for the
user to look at the installer's database
to see how their system is configured.
So we trust you to provide
useful and valid information.
Finally, all of that boils down
to inform the installer.
Don't bypass it.
Don't work around it, because really,
you're working around your customers.
Your customers want to know
what's on their machine.
They want to be able to see,
did I install this correctly?
We might provide other features
in the future that check to see if
things are still installed correctly.
And so the more and the more accurate
information you provide the installer,
the more powerful we can make it.
So those are upgrades.
To summarize the entire presentation,
we want you to pick
your delivery mechanism.
You've got disk images, zip files,
and starting in 10.5, flat packages.
Think about what your customer wants
in their installation experience.
Are they the kind of customer
that understands disk
images and drag installs?
Then that's what you should provide.
If your customer wants more
of a handheld experience,
use the installer.
Start using PackageMaker 3.0.
PackageMaker 3.0, new in Leopard.
We've put a huge amount of work into it,
and we're really happy with it.
Support relocatable applications.
Apple themselves has been kind of
sketchy about this in the past.
A lot of it has been because how
difficult it's been to create
the file that the installer needs
that understands how to find your
application on the hard drive.
With PackageMaker 3,
it will create this very difficult to
understand file that works on 10.4,
and it will create this new syntax
that we're introducing in 10.5 that
we'll cover in more detail on Thursday.
Much easier to support this both at
the low level and at the high level.
Create packages for
each of your components.
Fine-grained packages allow you easier
control in the custom install panel,
make the installer more efficient.
Don't trick the installer.
Don't hack receipts.
Don't delete receipts.
Library receipts, it's our database.
It's not meant for
people to play around in.
And don't create or remove
files using scripts.
Again, don't trick the installer.
Finally, send us your feedback.
We have a whole lot of
new features in Leopard.
We're going to have an entire
another session on Thursday.
I mentioned this a couple times.
That session is going to be nothing but
new features in Leopard in the installer.
So, we want you to play with those.
Tell us how they work.
Tell us if they meet your needs,
and send us your feedback,
ideally as soon as possible,
because the sooner we hear that feedback,
the quicker we can roll those
changes into Leopard and get them
perhaps out with 10.5 itself.
So, to learn more about all this stuff,
we have two lab sessions this week.
We have one this afternoon at 2:00 PM.
I think that's pretty
much after this session.
We have another one Thursday at 5:00,
which will be after
our other presentation.
We have a bunch of documentation
that's available on the Internet.
We have a brand new
software delivery guide.
This was just produced by our
Technical Publications Department.
It covers all of the things I've covered
in this talk and a whole bunch more.
And it's available at the
URL that you see up there.
We also have the Installer Release Note.
This goes into detail about the
syntax for distribution scripts
and the JavaScript APIs that are
available inside the Installer.
And that Release Note is available
both on the Internet and it's installed
as part of the developer tools in
the standard Release Note area.
We also have a public mailing list.
This has really taken off.
We introduced this, I think,
about a year ago.
Several dozen developers
working on their packages,
working on their products.
Not a very high traffic mailing list.
It's not like people are
making new packages every day.
But when people run into little glitches
with the installer or they want to know,
hey, how did this work on 10.3
versus 10.4 versus 10.5,
this broad collection of people helping
each other is really an improvement.
And finally,
there's the example distribution script
that's used to install the OS itself,
which is on the installer DVD at
systeminstallationpackages.osinstallmpack
agecontentsosinstall.dist.